---
layout: post
title: "Reasons to switch"
date: 2015-01-04 23:18:07 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
---

I don't personally argue that anyone else should learn to switch.  But
other people do, and here I've collected some of their arguments.  If
you're looking to be persuaded, read on.  Otherwise, keep dancing just
as you were.

<!-- More -->

## As a matter of "gender-free" dance

I'm not even going to try to summarize this for fear of misspeaking.
If anyone wants to provide a short summary, I'm happy to quote it with
attribution. Until then, perhaps it would be helpful to read the
"About Us" pages of the
[Heather and Rose](http://heatherandrose.org/about.shtml) and
[LCFD](http://lcfd.org/about/) organizations, or this (vehement) post
from the
[Ambidancetrous](http://ambidancetrous.tumblr.com/post/53337628440/the-revolution-will-be-polite)
blog.

## When the genders are imbalanced

In theory, people who can dance both roles can switch to the minority
role and keep dancing even when the genders are unbalanced.  Besides
keeping them dancing, it also improves the dance for those who dance
only a single role.

See [Jeff Kaufman's blog](http://www.jefftk.com/p/dance-both-roles)
for a more cogent presentation, and ensuing discussion.

## To liven up the choreography

I personally consider switching an embellishment on the called
choreography, much like twirling through a courtesy turn or continuing
a four-facing-four as an improper duple while you're out on the end.
It makes the dance more difficult and interesting.

## To improve one's dancing

Many dancers who switch report a newfound empathy which has in turn
improved their skill in their original role.  Certainly, I believe I
have a more intuitive understanding of hand placement during a swing
now that I've had quite a few gents' hands placed upon me.

Despite the number of times I've heard people make this claim on the
Facebook or during long car rides, I haven't found a good source
online.  The closest I've seen comes from a non-contra tradition:
[teaching novice blues dancers both roles](http://ambidancetrous.tumblr.com/page/2)

## To dance with more good dancers

Unless you have reason to believe your own gender suffers a bizarre
dearth of good dancers, learning to switch significantly increases the
number of good dancers you can ask to dance.

## To learn new flourishes

As a special case of the previous reason: due to the common conflation
of male with gent with lead, the one group of people who are most
likely to teach me a new flourish are the same group of people I am
least likely to dance with, unless I switch.

## For a different contra experience

In many contras, the lady and gent have sufficiently different
choreography that switching is close to doing a whole new dance.  And
even when the called choreography is mostly symmetric, many figures
feel different from the two positions. 

[Henry Morgenstein](http://www.henryandjacqui.com/Essays/Woman.htm)
has written a fuller description.

## An apology

I introduced this post with the pretense of not pushing any particular
position myself.  In fact, I have something of an anti-position.

I tend not to push the LGBTQ aspect.  In part, because it's already
advocated by others more informed and passionate about gender-free
dance.  But also, because I think the "gender-free" movement makes a
mistake in connecting switching to issues of gender.  As usual,
[someone else](http://www.ruthiebyers.com/2014/12/20/gender-free-berkeley-contra.html)
said it first:

> it seems like no one thinks straight people are interested. Which is
> kind of ridiculous. The advantages of dancing both roles, or dancing
> your non-traditional role, apply to everyone
